---
title: "Surveying collaborative aspects of archaeological software development"
---

Advanced digital practices involving the production and manipulation of computer code are gradually becoming ubiquitous aspects of archaeological research. The relative simplicity afforded by scientific scripting languages such as R and Python, which enable custom code to be written, modified, commented, reviewed, shared and reused with ease, has been a boon for fostering greater digital data manipulation skills. Code used to support archaeological research largely comprises custom scripts or project files that pass data through functions that parse and transform inputs according to documented routines. Base functions or functions included in generic data manipulation, analysis and visualization packages (such as those that collectively form the Tidyverse, ROpenSci and NumPy ecosystems, or 'off the shelf' database management systems or visualization engines) typically support a broad set of common scholarly applications. Like the tools adopted from other disciplines and industries in other archaeological research settings, whereby archaeologists are forced to either work within a tool's limits or select and make use of tools in unanticipated ways, the unique challenges and features of archaeological work are rarely accounted for in their design. However, as archaeology has become more firmly embedded in its use of digital systems, which involves figuring out how digital tools can be made to serve their needs more effectively, archaeologists have also been busy creating their own software that explicitly target archaeological use cases.

Archaeological software created by archaeologists for archaeological purposes differ from one-off scripts used to process and analyze data pertaining to specific research projects. As series of generic functions that can operate with any appropriate input data, these tools abstract the factors, processes and desired outcomes that the designers believe to be common among the tools' users. In other words, these are systems that can handle mutable inputs, rather than custom procedures tailored to the specific datasets that they are meant to process. This paper surveys the field of archaeological software development in order to document what kinds of general-use digital tools archaeologists are making, and to identify norms regarding how software is built and maintained, focusing specifically on collaborative aspects of software development. We use open-archaeo (https://open-archaeo.info/), a curated list of open source archaeological software and other digital resources, as the basis of this survey. This dataset is augmented with data collected from GitHub, a popular software development productivity platforms used by professional software developers and researchers alike to host and facilitate collaborative development work.

Our analysis examines trends relating to the frequency of documented work, the distribution of contributions made by collaborating participants, how software are documented, packaged and presented, and the use of tools designed to support collaborative workflows. More specifically, this study highlights trends regarding the areas in which archaeologists are either pooling resources for common goals or choosing to operate independently and in a redundant manner, factors that may contribute to either enthusiastic upkeep or abandonment of software development projects, how various means of communication and contribution are valued, and how GitHub is leveraged for either one-way or discursive means of engaging with relevant stakeholders. We consider these aspects of collaborative software development in relation to common structures, practices and challenges that bind archaeologists together as a distinct community, and draw comparisons with potentially conflicting underlying assumptions, attitudes and processes accounted for and encouraged by the infrastructures that archaeological software developers have come to rely upon.
